---
title: Me?! Write a developer blog?! No way!
date: 2015-04-01 06:00 EDT
tags: blogging
---

# Me?! Write a developer blog?! No way!

I have to admit, I never thought I would write a blog about code. Or at least
not before I had 20 years of experience with 9 languages and 3 programming
paradigms in my wheelhouse. People like me aren't supposed to write blogs about
software. People like [Martin Fowler][fowler], [Sandi Metz][metz], [Yehuda
Katz][katz], [Jim Gay][gay], and the awesome folks at [thoughtbot][thoughtbot]
are supposed to write blogs about software. If you want to write a software
blog, you need to be awesome at the craft, an expert in the language, and have
something profound or game-changing to talk about.

That's how I used to think about blogging as a developer. [Ben
Orenstein][orenstein] convinced me I was wrong. Ben told me, "You should be
blogging."<sup><a href="#fn1" id="ref1">1</a></sup> Software blogging doesn't
have to be a coding guru bestowing enlightenment on the world. Blogging, says
Ben, is about displaying your devotion to the craft, showing that you care
enough to learn and are willing to teach, and talking to the person in the
position *you* were in 4 weeks ago.

That's when the light bulb went on for me. On my journey of learning to code,
I'm further along than I was 30 days ago. I don't need to teach [James Edward
Gray II][gray] something about Ruby or [Uncle Bob][martin] something about
design principles. I just need to show the person I was 30 days ago something I
know now.

Thus, the name of this blog: `{ :to => self - 30 }`. I hope this blog will be a
chronicle of my ongoing journey in learning to program, constantly telling my
30-day-ago self what I've discovered. And I hope, perhaps, someone else in the
world will be helped along in their journey.

I know I'm going to make mistakes. I know that, as with my code, six months
from now I will likely wince at something I've written. But that's okay. Bad
coding and bad writing are part of the path to good coding and good writing. In
being transparent about where I am now, I hope to cultivate humility that, I
believe, will only make me a better developer in the future.

So yes, Ben, I will write a blog!

<p id="fn1" class="footnote"><sup><a href="#ref1">1</a></sup> I wish I could
say this happened over beer in a Boston pub. In truth, Ben "told me" this in a
video on <a href="https://upcase.com" title="Upcase">Upcase.com</a>. Upcase is
a great online learning environment from thoughtbot that I highly recommend.
The video content alone is worth the price of admission!</p>



[orenstein]:https://twitter.com/r00k
[fowler]:http://martinfowler.com/bliki/
[metz]:http://www.sandimetz.com/blog/
[katz]:http://yehudakatz.com/
[thoughtbot]:https://robots.thoughtbot.com/
[gay]:http://saturnflyer.com/blog/
[gray]:http://graysoftinc.com/
[martin]:http://blog.8thlight.com/uncle-bob/archive.html
