---
title: Why blog
date: 2015-04-02 09:15 EDT
tags: blogging
---

# Why Blog

[In an earlier post](/2015/04/01/me-write-a-developer-blog-no-way/) I talked
about my unexpected entrance into the world of blogging about code. I thought I
would take some time to talk about why I've taken on this task.

## To Learn

I love learning! I love diving into a book or exercise, ready to expand my
knowledge and sharpen my skills. But I find regularly that, by the time I've
reached the end, the beginning escapes me. Time is fleeting and sometimes just
getting through the book feels like all the time I have. Yet I learn and retain
so much more if I take the time to digest the material and explain it to myself
or someone else. Blogging, I hope, will be a chance to do that digesting and
explaining.

## To Teach

I love to teach! At a recent hack night at my local Ruby meetup, I was able to
help someone struggling through a homework assignment for her boot camp. It was
invigorating to take what I've learned and help someone else learn it as well,
knowing that I was in her exact position not long ago. There were far more
capable developers in the room than I but I was able to help someone make a few
more steps in their journey having walked them myself. I hope blogging, even
though we aren't face-to-face in this conversation, may help someone in a
similar way.

## To Remember

In many a Ruby Rogues podcast, one of the Rogues mentions blogging as a way to
recall what they've learned. One Google search and they're back to their blog
reading their own answer to the question they now face but had forgotten. I
hope that blogging will be a repository of knowledge that I can refer back to
in order to remember.

## To Care

Ben Orenstein talks about blogging as a way to demonstrate you care about your
craft. I hope blogging will be that. But I also anticipate blogging will be a
*means* of growing my passion, not just a demonstration of it. I hope that
taking the time to think through and describe an issue will cultivate even
greater concern about quality in my work.

## To Communicate

If you've read anything about career skills needed by a developer to work at a
desirable company on a quality team, you've read about the importance of
quality communication. One person may be a master of algorithms but unable to
explain a solution to another developer. Another may write beautiful
abstractions but can't compose a clear email to a stakeholder. Solid developers
need both programming and communication chops. Blogging is an opportunity to
practice the skills of clear communication.

## To Give

One thing I enjoy about being part of the programming community is the
willingness to give. From the open-source nature of so many projects, to
conferences whose video archives are free, to extensive blogging, to free
online books and tutorials, to local meetups, and even the paid resources that
are available, I have found so many programmers who are willing to share their
time, knowledge, and creativity. In blogging, I hope to be an active, giving
member of this community.

## To Enjoy

It seems the act of reflecting on and then expressing our experience heightens
that experience, making it even more enjoyable. This is one reason we have fish
stories and detailed recounts of races. Telling others about our experiences
gives us more joy in them than without the telling. I hope in this blog I will
find even greater joy in my journey of developing software than I would without
it.
